---
title: "Recently №1: Socrates, Stoicism and the joy of lingering"
description: Personal updates for July 2025, books I've been reading, and a few other things worth your time.
tags: ["recently", "personal", "philosophy", "reading"]
image: "/assets/images/og/socrates.jpg"
---

Over a year ago I promised myself I'd write regular updates about what I've been doing and reading. Unfortunately, I never really developed that habit. Sadly, [my last update](/blog/recently-apr-may-2024/) was in June 2024. Part of the reason I stopped writing these updates was that they felt a bit too personal. And another part of the reason is that I just never made enough time to write them. But I'm over the cringe factor of the former problem—I actually enjoy reading many other bloggers' regular updates, so why not write my own? And I've started to carve out more daily time for writing, which helps with the latter.

So this is a reboot of my semi-monthly "Recently" series. Here we go.

---

## It's good to be bored

We're approaching the end of summer here in Northern California. I reminded my kids about this fact the other day—that school would be starting up again in less than a month—and I was met with a series of groans from my son about how quickly the summer break has passed by. I responded: "That's good! It means you haven't been bored." Though, I have to admit, immediately regretted saying it. I do believe there is actually immense value in allowing kids to be bored. It creates space for creativity, reflection and imagination.

I've been reading a lot of philosophy lately, and my son's commentary on the passage of time gave me opportunity to reflect on what I read recently in Byung-Chul Han's [The Scent of Time](https://bookshop.org/a/106240/9781509516056). We often think of time (in our modern culture) as a kind of plodding linear progression, but we know from experience that time expands and dilates depending on our own perceptions. As a kid, I remember some long, hot summers that seemed to drag on and on and on towards some infinite horizon—it felt like school would never start again. This is because I was stuck at home without any organized activities, left to my own devices. Nobody told me how I should spend my time, so I mostly spent it wandering the neighborhood, playing with friends, reading books, or riding my bike to the local 7-11 for candy or a Slurpee. My own kids don't have this experience; they are enrolled in summer camp every single weekday, their days packed with crafts and activities that other people have decided. They are almost never bored.

Han argues that our modern perception that time is accelerating is due to our collective inability to *linger.* We have no space or opportunity for contemplation—instead we move from activity to activity, experience to experience, thing to thing. Nothing has any discernible duration. This parallels, I think, my own experience of summer compared to my kids recent experience of summer. I had lots of opportunity to linger; my kids had very little.

With one exception! In early July, we decided to drive north to Oregon for a weeklong family vacation, where we spent the days swimming, canoeing, cycling, exploring lava caves, roasting s'mores, and just generally enjoying the glory of long, warm summer days in the Pacific Northwest. Summer in Oregon and Washington always looks so lush and green, the landscape punctuated by the vibrant colors of wildflowers in full bloom, with that northern latitude daylight lasting well into the evening, creating days that feel long and luxurious. There was a lot of lingering going on. The week felt like it had real *duration.*

This was a much-needed reprieve after what I can easily classify as one of the most stressful and challenging months of my life. In early June my wife was recovering from major emergency surgery ([I wrote about this a bit previously](https://seanvoisen.com/stream/2025-06-10-it-takes-a-village/)) and I suddenly found myself in the position of single parent and caregiver, without any family support nearby, while simultaneously having to keep things moving at work. It was rough. I burnt out. So I feel immensely grateful for the time away from our normal routines, which I used to its fullest to reset, reflect, and recharge.

## Getting on the Socrates bandwagon

The major life events I alluded to above have led me to both get much more serious about my meditation habit, and take a deep dive into Western philosophy. For the past two months, all I have been reading in the evening is philosophy. I've loved it.

Last year, William Irvine's excellent [Guide to the Good Life](https://bookshop.org/a/106240/9780195374612) stoked my curiosity on Stoicism, which led to me down a rabbit hole, reading multiple other books on Stoicism, including the great original source texts, such as [Marcus Aurelius' Meditations](https://bookshop.org/a/106240/9781541673861) or [Epictetus' Enchiridion](https://standardebooks.org/ebooks/epictetus/short-works/george-long). I realize I sound like a cliché at this point. It's hard to open YouTube poke around Substack without stumbling on some white tech bro quoting Marcus Aurelius or extolling the virtues of reading the Meditations. I get it.

But Stoicism has seen a modern resurgence for a reason. It offers excellent philosophical and psychological tools for coping with periods of suffering, especially when the world feels out of control (and everything feels out of control these days). I see some people, however, criticizing Stoicism for precisely this aspect of the philosophy—that it is a coping mechanism based on eliminating emotions and a deep feeling for life rather than fully embracing it. There's a lot to say here, but for now I'll just say I respectfully disagree. That's not my experience. There's a difference between ancient Stoicism and its modern offspring, and I've found the supposed consolations of Stoicism to only enrich my lived experience. Stoicism parallels Zen in this way—both offer approaches to life that are easy to misunderstand at the surface-level until you make an effort to practice them for yourself.

Anyway ... my interest in Stoicism has led me to explore more philosophy, so this past month I figured I'd start with the great-grandfather of it all: Socrates. One way to learn about Socrates is to simply start at the source: reading Plato's dialogues. I initially went this route, starting with [Five Dialogues](https://www.amazon.com/Plato-Dialogues-Euthyphro-Apology-Classics/dp/0872206335), but found it to be a mistake. Without any biographical information, nor any historical context on the life and times of Socrates, nor any guidance on how to interpret the dialogues, nor any deep background in philosophy, I was floundering. Then I discovered Donald Robertson's [How to Think Like Socrates](https://bookshop.org/a/106240/9781250280503).

Earlier this year I read Donald Robertson's [How to Think Like a Roman Emperor](https://bookshop.org/a/106240/9781250621436). Of the many books on Stoicism I've now read that are *not* ancient source texts, *How to Think Like a Roman Emperor* stands out as one of my favorites for its ability to seamlessly ground Marcus Aurelius' flavor of Stoicism in Roman history, while providing guidance on the practical application of Stoicism in modern times. How To Think Like Socrates leans on the same formula, weaving Plato's dialogues in a rich tapestry of Greek history, and providing practical guidance on how to apply Socrates' ways of thinking to modern life through the lens of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT).

## Other philosophy books I've been reading

Here are all the other philosophy books I have read recently, captured on my [bookshelf page](/bookshelf) as well:

- [Open Socrates by Agnes Callard](https://bookshop.org/a/106240/9781631498466) — A fascinating look at Socrates (both the historical person and Plato's semi-fictional character), in which Callard makes a case for a neo-Socratic ethics as a way of living. Basically, this book felt like Callard is trying to convince the reader to live as she does. (And if you don't know about Callard, [there's a great biographical article on New Republic](https://newrepublic.com/article/190778/agnes-callard-philosopher-uncomfortable-questions) detailing her rather unorthodox life.) I thoroughly enjoyed the book, even if I disagreed with some of her assertions.
- [Socrates: Ironist and Moral Philosopher by Gregory Vlastos](https://bookshop.org/a/106240/9780801497872) — I picked this up after finishing Open Socrates because Callard references it so much. It's a very detailed look at Socrates' supposed "strangeness," discussing the differences between Socrates as presented in Plato's earlier dialogues (the historical Socrates) and Socrates in Plato's later work (Socrates as mouthpiece for Plato's own philosophy).
- [The Burnout Society by Byung-Chul Han](https://bookshop.org/a/106240/9780804795098) — This is the first book I've read of Han's. It is hard to parse without a background in some of the philosophers Han is building upon or responding to (like Heidegger). Nevertheless, the book is short (like all his works) and worth pushing through anyway, because the overall message of his argument—that we live in an "achievement society" dominated by excessive "positive" energy driving us all to constantly do more and be more—feels like a really accurate assessment of our times.
- [The Scent of Time by Byung-Chul Han](https://bookshop.org/a/106240/9781509516056) — A deep meditation on the perception of "acceleration" and it's root causes. Essentially, this is Han's commentary on the loss of the contemplative life—the *vita contemplativa*—and what it means for modernity.

## And some other desiderata

The complete essay documentary film of Byung-Chul Han's The Burnout Society [is on YouTube](https://youtu.be/bNkDeUApreo?si=lZtGzGMU5AuCV1-d), and it's wonderfully meditative. It's basically Han wandering Berlin and Seoul, commenting on the visual symptoms of fatigue, burnout and depression in both cities, but the part covering Korea's approach to suicide prevention was especially eye-opening.

Joan Westenberg has been putting out a lot of provocative pieces recently, [but this one about deleting their entire Obsidian archive](https://www.joanwestenberg.com/p/i-deleted-my-second-brain)—7-years and 10,000 notes is especially illuminating. Even though I'm a regular Obsidian user, I've long held that the "second brain" metaphor is completely misleading, and Westenberg corroborates it here.

Lastly, Oliver Burkemann's [Navigating by aliveness](https://ckarchive.com/b/zlughnhk8772ma7qrr9qehwzgng00f6) is a great commentary on the overall discourse around the output of generative AI:

>Yet I think it [aliveness] might be the key to understanding how to think and feel about AI, how to respond to it, how to integrate it into our lives or not – and how to ensure, as technology marches on, that we don’t lose sight of what really matters for a meaningfully productive life.

Lots to chew on there.